For #1 I used a random skybox after my original idea proved to be 
difficult. My original idea was to grab a galaxy skybox and put a 
flat Earth on it but for some reason every galaxy skybox I had
downloaded was not working so i decided to just pick a random one
and use it. I chose a beach, I think. Then I based the terrain off
of Angus' terrain displacement code and just changed the image. I 
did add in my own grass, dirt, and snow (I used ice) textures. At 
first I had tried to add water, sand, and rock textures to go with
the beach theme. I replaced the textures accordinly so that the 
effect would be the same as Angus' original but it wasn't the case
and my height map looked nothing like a beach with sea cliffs. 
Finally for the water I just made a new plane, and put it slightly
above the terrain to give the effect that there was water on spots 
below sea level and I added in Angus' perlin noise vertex shader to 
create a slight wavy motion on the water and I also altered the color
in the fragment shader to give it an aqua blue color. The only thing
that isn't working as expected (aside from water not being reflective) 
is that for some odd reason my GUI is not working. The original idea 
was to allow the user to move the water level up and also let them 
alter the wavy motion of the water and that didn't workl the GUI is 
there it just doesn't do anything.

For #2 I decided to attempt to simulate boiling water.I grabbed 
Angus' perlin noise code again and applied it to a sphere. I then
changed the FS shader to display a blue color that ended up being 
this blend of blue and black so it looks more like that dark water
you find ob google maps when you look at the ocean. I placed the 
partcle system behind the sphere and changed the particle colors to
white at first but then realized that gray would have been a better
fit so I changed the color to gray. For the GUI I basically grabbed 
the pre existing one that came with the particle system and got rid 
of a few parameters; mostly the ones that would make (my already 
unnatural boiling water simulation) it look really awkward and less
natural. For example, I got rid of turbulance because turbulance made
it so that the particles kind of all get shot out in a similar 
direction which isn't the way boiling water works since steam exits 
in random directions so the user can mostly just manipulate how fast 
and where the particles go. 